The Seed of Benefit and Happiness

Behavioural Guidelines

by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

Oṃ svasti.The light of the Three Supreme Jewels, like a hundred blazing suns,Triumphs entirely
over the darkness of the two obscurations—May the supreme guide, the one who bestows the
lightOf sublimely perfect freedom and liberation, grant auspiciousness.

Perfect saṅgha members are noble friends who are worthy of the veneration of all, including
gods and human beings; since they exemplify the sublime splendour of merit, they alleviate
problems related to the teachings and beings and contribute to the excellence of benefit
and happiness. Thus, when training in the precious teachings as part of the noble activity
that accords with tradition, it is necessary to rely upon a foundation of pure discipline,
as Ācārya Vasubandhu made clear:

Observing discipline, and having heard and contemplated theteachings,One applies oneself intensively
to meditation.[1]

Thus, you must certainly receive the lay and novice vows before the age of fifteen. From the
time that you begin to learn to read the alphabet, which is the basis of all qualities, you
should memorize the daily recitations (chos spyod), and learn the stages of drawing a maṇḍala
from coloured sand, making torma, performing dance, and playing the three types of
musical instrument—i.e., those that are blown, beaten and chimed. Those of the highest capacity
might study the outer and inner sciences, but at the very least there should be no one
who does not know at least the Bodhicaryāvatāra and three sets of vows.

From the age of twenty, having taken on the supreme of vows, the full ordination of a bhikṣu,
the root of training is then to avoid being tainted by the defeats[2] or residual offences.[3]
Indeed, from the moment you become a novice or fully ordained monk, the root of discipline
is to guard against the four kinds of defeat (or five if alcohol is included).

Rules concerning women and alcohol, as well as the slaughter of animals and sale of livestock
for slaughter are well established; if a fault occurs, it is appropriate to apply a penalty,
in accordance with both dharmic and secular approaches. As the saying goes:

Someone might have great learning,But unless they maintain discipline well,Their lack of ethics
will invite censure,And thus their learning is incomplete.[4]

And:

Ethical violations lead to the lower realms;
Great erudition cannot guard against this.

Never be apart, therefore, from the upper and lower robes that are a support for conscientiousness,
conscience and propriety. And, with mindfulness, vigilance and conscientiousness,
treat your elders with respect, extend love and kindness to those who are your junior, and
avoid rivalry and envy towards your peers. Maintain calm and composure, and never be without
the four qualities of a virtuous practitioner.[5] It is crucially important to train in
perceiving everyone purely.

The three practices of 'healing and purification' (gso sbyong; poṣadha), rainy season retreat
(dbyar gnas; varṣā) and the ceremonial lifting of restrictions (dgag dbye; pravāraṇā) constitute
the foundation or core of the teachings, the essence or basis of the oceanic Vinaya.
If you practise them regularly, therefore, you will experience their unimaginably vast
benefits and purpose, by remembering the kindness of our precious Teacher, preventing any
faults or impairments of commitments, making progress in the three trainings, turning away
from sources of carelessness, guarding against harm and injury to living beings, pleasing
the virtuous gods, increasing the splendour of auspiciousness in every place and region,
and so on. It is crucial, therefore, that you muster all your diligence, and carry out these
three foundational rites authentically, and that you spend the rainy season retreat teaching
and studying texts such as the Pratimokṣa Sūtra or works on the three sets of vows
(sdom gsum). Give up all forms of inappropriate conduct, but especially gossiping about warfare
and banditry, singing folk songs, shouting, and leaping or running about. Devote yourself
instead to daily prayers, study and mantra recitation.

Furthermore, the Pratimokṣa Sūtra says:

A saṅgha that is harmonious is happy.
To the harmonious, austerities are comfortable.

And Śāntideva made the following aspiration:

May the saṅgha always be in harmony
And may all its aims be accomplished.[6]

As these statements indicate, it is of the utmost importance that members of the saṅgha go about
their daily activities with mutual understanding and agreement. Such concord is an especially
vital principle during this age of degeneration.

In short, unless those who receive donations on behalf of the living and deceased have brought
their minds thoroughly under control they will face catastrophic consequences. As the Vinayavibhaṅga
says:

It would be better for someoneWhose discipline is impaired and ill-maintainedTo eat lumps of
iron ablaze with fireThan to consume the alms of local people.

Thus, for followers of the Teacher, the core of the practice is to avoid breaches of ethical
discipline and to strive constantly to carry out the ten forms of dharmic activity, which
Ajita[7] listed as:

Copying texts, making offerings, charity,Study, reading, memorizing,Explaining, reciting aloud,Contemplating
and meditating—These ten activitiesBring merit beyond measure.[8]

Exerting oneself in the methods for developing learning through study and contemplation and
increasing renunciation through meditation serves to preserve the Buddha's teachings. That
is why it is crucial that you accomplish your own and others' aims by carefully applying
yourself to the areas of training.

Rich with the treasure of pure higher discipline,And strengthened through bodhicitta nectar,They
abide in profound samādhi on the two stages—May gatherings of the saṅgha community fill
the world.

Jamyang Chökyi Lodrö Rimé Tenpé Gyaltsen Palzangpo, who has the name of an incarnation of Jamyang
Khyentse, composed these behavioural guidelines for the training of the saṅgha community,
which are in harmony with the statements of sublime beings of the past. May virtue and
excellence abound! Sarva maṅgalaṃ. Śubhaṃ.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön
Sogyal Trust, 2020.