The Pellucid Mirror

Behavioural Guidelines for the Saṅgha

by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

Oṃ svasti.Sages who have crossed the ocean of relinquishment and realizationAnd gained the splendour
of spontaneously bringing twofold benefit,The sacred Dharma, which soothingly extracts
saṃsāra's faults,And the noble assembly who uphold it—before you all I bow.

Unrivalled amid the snowy peaks in overcoming erroneous tenets,And upholding the teachings of
the omniscient victorious ones,Abounding in the discourse of the learned and accomplished—Before
the highly celebrated Sakyapa, I bow.

Especially the one who was lauded in the Sage's prophecy,Kunga Zangpo, holder of the treasury
of Buddhadharma,Whose liberational life, like a white lotus, was unparalleled—Before the
omniscient Evaṃpa, respectfully I bow.

May the Mañjughoṣa guru, together with the lineage,Peaceful and wrathful yidams who skilfully
bestow twofold accomplishment,And the ocean of awesome and terrifying dharma guardians,Scatter
flowers of auspiciousness throughout the ten directions, I pray.

Having thus invited virtue and excellence through verses of homage and auspiciousness, I shall
now set out the regulations for the saṅgha community which resides in the great temple
of Sagang Tupten Gepel, and which upholds the Sakya tradition in the country of Amdo, to the
north of the blissful land of Domey.

The Ācārya Vasubandhu said:

Observing discipline, and having heard and contemplated theteachings,One applies oneself intensively
to meditation.[1]

It is necessary to practice in accordance with the meaning of this statement. Thus, all those
who belong to the ranks of the monks of this monastery, who have no other allegiances and
are not wandering abroad, as well as all those who remain in the ranks of dharma assembly,
should take the vows of refuge. Novice monks should begin to learn to read from a reading
instructor as soon as they take their vows. They must also learn the daily recitations,
fulfillment and healing (bskang gso) rites, and other rituals. Those with specially appointed
positions and those without such positions should also learn, according to their capacity,
the procedure for an accomplishment ceremony (sgrub mchod), how to draw maṇḍalas of
coloured sand, how to make torma, and how to play the three types of musical instrument—i.e.,
those that are blown, chimed and beaten. Those of greatest intelligence should study sūtra
and mantra and the sciences as well. When they reach the appropriate age, it would be
best for them to travel to Sakya or Ngor; but if this is not feasible, they should take full
ordination from the resident preceptors who possess the vows themselves. They must then
observe the fundamental precepts without impairing them; for impairment brings major faults:

One might take lightly the compassionate guide's teachings,And transgress them ever so slightly,But
that would still lead to suffering.Just as cutting down a bamboo grove spoils a grove
of mango.[2]

As this suggests, it is important to avoid straying from the status of a virtuous practitioner
and thereby transgressing prescribed rules, such as the four fundamental precepts (or five
with the inclusion of the rule against alcohol), the partial offences, downfalls that
require forfeiture (spang ltung) and so on, and instead possess the four qualities of a virtuous
practitioner.[3] It is especially inappropriate for women to travel to and stay overnight
at the monastery and for alcohol to be consumed therein, so rules related to females
and alcohol consumption must be strictly enforced. It is also unacceptable for anyone, no
matter how powerful or humble, to slaughter animals in monastery's vicinity. Screaming,
shouting, musical performance and other such forms of misbehaviour are likewise impermissible.


Anyone who violates the core precepts should be expelled from the ranks of the saṅgha. Monks
must always refrain from wandering through towns and villages and remain in the monastery.
It is very important that you put effort into study, practicing approach and accomplishment,
and so on. There must be no quarreling or fighting within the monastery. Traditions related
to rituals and daily recitations should be learned through observation and never allowed
to decline. All arrangements for the assembly should constantly improve. Government
grants to the monastery, general endowments and the like should not be spent or removed; were
this to happen, the amount would need to be replaced.

Instead of pursuing other dharma schools and traditions, it is crucial that you maintain the
view and conduct of the glorious Sakya's own immaculate systems of sūtra and mantra. The
rainy season retreat (dbyar gnas; varṣā) and rite of healing and purification (gso sbyong;
poṣadha) should also be carried out according to one's own tradition, by following Jamgön
Ngawang Lekdrup's advice on the three foundational rituals.[4]

Communal religious offerings should not be wasted but distributed among the saṅgha and used
to sponsor representations [of enlightened body, speech and mind] and so on.

These are some of the most important things a saṅgha should do in order to inspire others' trust.
Other internal regulations should also be kept; there is no need to check whether they
are included here among the general saṅgha guidelines.

In short, it is crucial to restrain the three doors [of body, speech and mind] with mindfulness,
vigilance and conscientiousness and to have respect for the precepts, as explained in
the Pratimokṣa Sūtra, the immaculate words of the omniscient Lion of the Śākyas:

Monks with all sense faculties under control,Go forth for the sake of unchanging buddhahood.Those
who seek definite liberation,Must always observe the pratimokṣa. One who harms another
is not a monk,One who injures another is not a śramaṇa. Just as the clear-sightedSeek to
avoid misery,The wise avoid misdeedsIn this world of living beings.

And:

Correctly joined to a higher mentality,
This is the teaching of the Buddhas.

It is important, therefore, to cultivate an utterly pure higher mentality by considering the
difficulty of obtaining a free, well-favoured human form, the difficulty of encountering
the precious teachings of the victorious buddhas, and how this excellent opportunity will
not last even though the precious teachings themselves may endure.

It is said to be more meritorious to keep just one of the foundational precepts during this
degenerate age than it was to observe all two hundred and fifty rules in a past fortunate
age. The King of Samādhi says:

One who practises a single training by day and nightAt a time when the sacred Dharma is disappearingAnd
the teachings of the Sugata coming to an endAttains exceptionally high levels
of merit thereby.

Keep this in mind. At this time, when the five degenerations are on the rise and the teachings
of the Buddha are like a butter lamp on the verge of going out, it is up to the saṅgha
to preserve the teachings. Maintain harmony and pure discipline, therefore, as you apply yourselves
to the precious teachings of the peerless Teacher and the treasury of the three
trainings by striving in the learning sphere of study and contemplation and the renunciation
sphere of meditation. The Verses of Nāga King Drum says:

People will sacrifice their wealth to preserve their bodies,And forfeit wealth and physical
wellbeing to save their lives.Yet, everything—wealth, physical wellbeing, even life itself—Must
be relinquished in order to safeguard the Dharma.

As this says, losing the body and life that we cherish so strongly or the wealth of Indra, even
a fraction of which is hard to fathom, would be insignificant compared to the extinction
of the sacred Dharma teachings. Since that would entail the loss of all virtue and happiness
throughout existence and quiescence, the Dharma is to be dearly cherished and protected.

In short, it is vitally important that you turn away physically, verbally and mentally from
the corrupt, careless, uninspired conduct of ordinary householders and instead act with physical,
verbal and mental integrity and with a pure, altruistic motivation that is free of
hypocrisy and deceit. Be entirely conscientious as you perfect the qualities of a Buddha,
and always be mindful and vigilant as you monitor good and bad. As Śāntideva said:

With my palms together I sayTo all who would guard their minds:Make every effort to preserveBoth
mindfulness and vigilance.[5]

By always acting calmly, in a controlled yet relaxed manner and never transgressing the rules,
you will contribute to the arising of vast virtue and excellence in this world. And with
a determination to be free, to 'awaken under the rules of the saṅgha', it is right that
you strive in the methods to become a supreme object of merit for all gods and human beings,
someone who values their own teachings.

It is well for a community to be especially amicable,To be always harmonious, garbed in robes
of threefold purity.Bringing joy to people who are then rewarded for their faith—May there
be the fortune of a peerless saṅgha, adornment to gods and men.

May the lives of the holders of the teachings be secure.May patrons of the teachings flourish
and prosper.May the happiness of devoted followers of the teachings increase.And may all
who would bring harm to the teachings be pacified.

Base of the precious treasury of the Sage's teachings,Great Dharma centre of Tashi Gepel Ling,May
you never stray from teaching and practice,And may the teachings flourish and endure.


These behavioural guidelines were written in Dzongsar Monastery in Derge during the Earth Tiger
year by the Dharma teacher Jamyang Chökyi Lodrö, who holds the name of an incarnation
of Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo. May virtue and excellence abound. Maṅgalaṃ.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön
Sogyal Trust, 2020.